Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we
are talking about the uncomfortable
topic of white supremacy.
And specifically, a white supremacist
group that emerged from the ruins of the
war-torn United States, the Ku Klux Klan.
By day, their members appeared as normal
members of society - doctors and lawyers,
judges, politicians and policemen.
By night they were an underground group
who murdered, lynched, tortured and
terrorised people different to them.
You will no doubt have heard of the Ku
Klux Klan, or the KKK, but in today’s
episode we’ll go a little deeper,
talking about where they came from,
what they actually did, why the group
was tolerated for so long, and their
repeated rises and falls throughout
the past 150 years of American history.
OK, let’s get right into it and
talk about the Ku Klux Klan.
It is a warm summer night.
It’s dark, but you can see the
outline of four enormous crosses
on the hillside, and rows and rows
of hooded figures beyond them.
They wear white robes, and the
silhouettes of their hoods spread along
the hill as far as the eye can see.
There is anticipation in the air, and you
realise they are waiting for something.
To your left are hundreds of cars,
and people lounging around, drinking
beers, observing the spectacle.
Then, coming over the hill,
a man on horseback appears.
“Every Klansmen will salute the
Imperial Cyclops,” says a voice from
under its hood, though it’s hard
to tell exactly where it came from.
Slowly thousands of hands
start to rise up in the air.
Then the man on horseback takes a torch
and lights the crosses, one by one.
They burn bright, the
smell of smoke in the air.
Their flickering flames light up
the night sky, and you see that the
rows of hooded figures extend for
hundreds and hundreds of metres.
There are thousands of them,
their hands raised in the air.
It is July 1923, and you are in
Seattle, Washington, in the northwestern
United States, at a rally of the
Ku Klux Klan, the most infamous
hate group in American history.
The Ku Klux Klan, to put it plainly,
has terrorised the United States
for over 150 years, but in ebbs and
flows, we can split the Klan into
three specific periods of history.
The first phase started in
1865  and ended in 1872.
The second started in 1915
and ended in around 1944.
And the third started in the
1950s, grew in strength during
the Civil Rights movement, before
gradually reducing in size to the
fringe movement that it is today.
So, to understand these phases, we must
first go back to where it all started.
The Ku Klux Klan, was founded
in Pulaski, Tennessee in 1865.
The name is believed to come
from a combination of the Greek
word for circle, kyklos, and the
Scottish word clan, meaning group.
Now, if you know anything about
American history, you will probably have
noticed that the year of its founding,
1865, was quite a significant year.
It was, of course, the year the American
Civil War ended, and the origins of the
KKK, its very founding and existence,
come from those Civil War divides.
In fact, the first KKK branch, or
chapter, was started by former Confederate
soldiers -  those who fought for the south
and the states that were pro-slavery.
By the summer of 1867, a few
different branches had opened up
across the south, so they met up
and established what they called
the “Invisible Empire of the South.”
Sounds a little strange,
perhaps, a little mysterious.
Well, wait until you hear about
the names they gave members
of this Invisible Empire.
The first leader of the KKK, a Confederate
general named Nathan Bedford Forrest,
was known as the “grand wizard,” of
the Klan, and was top of a hierarchy
of various different grand dragons,
grand titans and grand cyclopses.
A cyclops, by the way, is the
gigantic monster with only one eye,
the type of creature that Odysseus
outsmarted by hiding under a sheep.
At this early stage, some Klan members,
or Klansmen as they are known, wore
masks or hoods and occasionally white
robes, but there was no established
uniform as there was in later years.
Now, it’s important to remind ourselves
of the historical and political
context in which the KKK was born.
The KKK was born during, and in
response to, the Reconstruction Era.
As you might have guessed from
the name, this was the federal
government’s attempt to reconstruct,
or put back together, the war-torn
South after this part of the country
had been destroyed by the Civil War.
As part of Reconstruction, the South
was split up into five districts, and
each state was told to pass the 14th and
15th Amendments of the US constitution,
which gave “equal protection” to former
slaves and the vote to black men.
After this, newly freed black
southerners began to become involved
in politics, sometimes winning election
to state and even federal government.
It was, clearly, a large
change in American society.
One day the law stated that
a man could own another man.
The next day, the law stated that
this previously owned man could
legislate over his former owner.
Now, to state the obvious, this is by
no means trying to lessen the horror
of this previous system of slavery,
but simply reminding you of what a
change in American society this was.
And for those ex-slave owners,
people who had profited greatly
from and still supported slavery,
there was a violent backlash.
And nowhere was this stronger
than with the Ku Klux Klan.
From 1867 to the early 1870s, it began a
terror campaign against politicians and
voters, black and white, in an effort
to overturn Reconstruction policies and
restore white supremacy in the South.
But it wasn’t just the KKK that was
opposed to Reconstruction, and the KKK was
far from the only white supremacist group.
During this period, there were many
other white supremacist organisations,
such as the Knights of the White
Camelia and the White Brotherhood.
Whatever the name of the group, their
methods and violence were the same.
Klansmen and other white
supremacist groups whipped, shot
and hung black Americans and their
white supporters in the night.
They burned down the houses of
black families as they slept, and
wore their masks or robes not only
to avoid being identified, but to
spread terror among the community.
So, who actually joined this hate
organisation in its first iteration?
When people think of the KKK, many
often think of poor, rural, often
less-educated, white southerners.
Now, though it’s true that the Klan’s
first phase was largely made up of
poorer, rural members, this stereotype
of its members is exactly that,
it’s a stereotype, and it doesn’t
include all the types of people who
were attracted to white supremacism.
In reality, the KKK drew its members from
all social classes, from the poorest of
farmhands right up to lawyers, doctors and
church ministers, highly educated people.
What’s more, many police officers
and politicians were also members
or at least supportive of the group,
meaning that the crimes it committed
very often went uninvestigated.
Now, fortunately, their efforts
to overturn these Restoration
policies failed, the Klan was too
disorganised, weak and inexperienced
to do much lasting damage, and is now
regarded as something of a political
failure during this first phase.
But, as we’ll see, the racial tensions
that gave birth to the KKK were still
bubbling away beneath the surface.
After forming again in 1915 in
Georgia, the Klan then registered
itself as a ‘fraternal organisation’,
trying to portray itself less as an
explicitly white supremacist group and
something closer to the Freemasons.
Importantly, by doing this, the Klan was
allowed to claim tax-exemption - meaning
that it wasn’t required to pay taxes.
The relevance of this will
become apparent in a minute.
But this second iteration, or form,
of the Klan was slightly different to
the first - it had expanded its hate.
Now the group was not only anti-black
but also anti-Jew, anti-Catholic,
generally anti-immigrant and opposed
to organised labour and trade
unionism, groups with traditionally
big black and Catholic representation.
As you will know, at the turn of the
twentieth-century the United States
experienced a surge in immigration,
especially from Europe, with huge
numbers of Catholics and eastern-European
Jews arriving in the country.
The vast majority of this was
concentrated in the North, and the
Klan’s revival, its second phase,
was largely born in reaction to this.
It also explains, in part at least,
why the group’s membership was slightly
different and spread northwards.
Though the KKK still had its traditional
southern stronghold, the Klan of the 1920s
was more northern, more middle-class, with
a political wing and even women’s groups.
For white supremacists in the north,
the migration of black southerners
northward, combined with the new
arrival of Catholics and Jews, was
changing the America they knew.
During this period, in the 1920s,
the Klan adopted the burning cross
as a symbol and began holding grand
rallies like the one you heard
about at the start of this episode.
The uniforms were also standardised,
and the white robes and pointed
hoods became more common.
And during this second phase of the
Klan, there were more members than ever.
By one estimate there were
over 4 million members.
If we take population data from the
1920 US census, which reports that
the population was roughly 106 million
people at the time, that means that
a staggering 4% of the American
population were members of the KKK.
And if we take the state of Indiana,
which had around a quarter of a
million members in 1925, around
30% percent of the state’s entire
white male population were Klansmen.
Mad, right?
And this is less than 100 years ago.
But after a series of scandals,
including the conviction of Indiana
Grand Dragon D.C Stephenson for rape
and murder in 1925, the Klan lost
moral credibility, membership started
to dwindle, started to reduce, and
it entered the 1930s much weaker.
And the Great Depression of the 1930s
substantially cut its membership, and the
group was even disbanded, or shut down,
in 1944, when the Internal Revenue Service
began demanding taxes from the Klan.
Partly as a result of this, it would
remain dormant for the next two decades,
with occasional bursts of localised
violence, largely in the rural South.
The second phase was over.
But the Klan emerged from the ashes
again in the 1950s, in opposition to the
civil rights movement, the movement to
give people of all races equal rights.
Klan activity in the South surged
again, and a deadly campaign of
harassment, intimidation, burnings,
beatings, bombings, lynchings and
shootings of African-Americans and white
pro-civil rights campaigners began.
Like in the aftermath of the Civil
War, the Klan enjoyed a resurgence in
popularity in response to government
action: in the mid-nineteenth century
it was against Reconstruction policies,
in the mid-twentieth century, it was in
reaction to the Civil Rights movement.
In 1954 when the Supreme Court ruled
that racially segregated schools were
unconstitutional, and therefore illegal,
a wave of violence spread across the
south, membership of the Klan grew
again, and by the late-1950s it was
holding rallies with thousands of people.
And as the Civil Rights movement fought
on, trying to dismantle the so-called
‘Jim Crow’ laws, the laws outlining
racial segregation, the Klan’s violence
became more gruesome, and shocking.
In Alabama, in 1957, a group
of KKK members abducted Edward
“Judge” Aaron, a black handyman
from Birmingham, in Alabama.
They castrated him, they cut
off his testicles, and poured
boiling chemicals into his wounds.
The KKK also began to use bombs,
something that was first done in 1956
when Klan leaders bombed the house of
civil rights leader Martin Luther King.
During the Civil Rights era, it's
thought the Klansmen were responsible
for around 70 bombings in Georgia
and Alabama and the burning of 30
black churches in Mississippi alone.
By the early-1960s the Klan had grown
into a loosely connected collection of
white supremacist groups spread out across
the southern states and all operating
under the Klan name - the Invisible
Empire was back, although it wasn’t
particularly structured or well-organised.
And unfortunately, just like during the
Klan’s first two phases, often at the
local level law enforcement did little
to stop the group’s terror campaign.
Like in the post-Civil War era and
during the 1920s, there were plenty of
police officers in the south who were
themselves Klansmen, and many more were
unsupportive of the Civil Rights movement.
As a result, there was a response
at a federal, a national level, a
move from above to infiltrate and
destroy the Klan once and for good.
In 1964, the FBI began a major
operation and by September of 1965 had
informants in 7 of the 14 different
Klan groups across the country.
Amazingly, of the 10,000 or so active
Klan members, it’s thought that as
many as 2,000 were giving information
to the government, and as a result its
leaders began being sent to prison.
This more prominent and violent
iteration was condemned from the
very top of the American state.
In 1965, President Lyndon Johnson publicly
attacked the Klan and announced the arrest
of four members following the murder of a
white Civil Rights campaigner in Alabama.
And as the late 1960s moved into
the 1970s, the combination of the
FBI operation, public rejection
of its violence, and its leaders
going to prison, the Klan became
even more of a fringe group with an
increasingly dwindling membership.
Now, one name you probably associate
with the KKK is David Duke, who was the
charismatic and supposedly respectable
face of the Ku Klux Klan during the 1970s.
His life is too bizarre to do justice in
a short section of this episode, so we are
actually going to do a full episode on his
life and his impact on the Ku Klux Klan.
That’s going to be the next episode,
so, a follow-up to this one.
But, in brief, although he was only
leader of the KKK for four years, he
did a huge amount to portray it as
a semi-respectable organisation, and
disguised its hideous beliefs behind a
respectable smile and a suit and tie.
He was a dangerous man indeed,
and we’ll go deep into the
reasons why in the next episode.
But moving on.
The KKK enjoyed very brief localised
revivals in the late-1980s and then again
in the early 2000s, but nothing close
to the levels of the 1960s, 1920s, or
Reconstruction Era, when it all started.
Ever since the 1980s, really, the
group has continued to become more
fragmented, lacking in organisation,
diluted by the emergence of newer
skinhead and neo-Nazi groups.
The Southern Poverty Law Center
estimated in 2017 that there were,
and I’m quoting directly, "at least 29
separate, rival Klan groups currently
active in the United States, and
they compete for members, dues, news,
media attention and the title of being
the true heir to the Ku Klux Klan.”
And all of this brings us back
to the modern day - the age of
the internet and social media.
Huge cross burning rallies like the
one in Seattle you heard about at the
start thankfully no longer exist, and
the Klan’s organising and meeting spaces
are now mostly virtual - among a tiny
minority of competing online radicals.
This makes it much more difficult
to accurately assess how many active
members the Klan has today, but most
estimates put it at a few thousand.
But clearly, the hateful ideas and values
of the Ku Klux Klan have gone nowhere.
You might remember the events of August
of 2017, in Charlottesville, Virginia,
when a white supremacist drove his car
into a crowd, killing one and injuring 35.
This wasn’t the Klan per se, but
a far-right ‘Unite the Right’
rally, which was an attempt
to merge the various far-right
groups, including the Ku Klux Klan.
So, while the organisation might
be a shadow of its former self,
this event served as one of many
grim reminders to all Americans,
and to the world, that its hateful
ideology lives on to this very day.
OK then, that’s it for today’s
episode on the Ku Klux Klan,
America’s most infamous hate group.
I hope it was an interesting one,
and whether you knew a lot about the
KKK, or this was the first time you’d
really heard anything about it, well
I hope you learned something new.
As a quick reminder, we are going
to be following up this one with
a members-only episode on the very
strange life of David Duke, the man
who took over the KKK when it was in
decline and tried to change its image.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
What do you think can and should be
done about these kinds of hate groups?
Are there similar types
of groups in your country?
And how has this changed over the years?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.